Hi, good afternoon.
So, this is Houston.
Um, flooded. Um,
as Misha already alluded to,
uh, we we have entered the tipping
points and over half of the world's
population lives in cities. Over half of
the world's cities are in coastal areas.
And the reality is that everything is
just getting wetter.
So in almost all cities, this is the
plan to deal with sea level rise. A seaw
wall, a wall against the sea.
So not only will a seaw wall always
ultimately fail, it's just a matter of
time. Sometimes they even make things
worse, eroding existing ecological storm
protection mechanisms like swamplands.
And perhaps even more importantly, or
conceptually importantly, the logics and
the models that we use to build our
future need a reimagining. So building
walls against perceived oncoming threats
are actually quite dangerous metaphors
to live by.
What if rather than changing the
environment to fit human needs, we
change the human to fit a changing
environment?
But how do we adapt? So this is the
dominant imagination of what the future
of the human looks like in our
collective consciousness, at least the
way it's represented in Google, heavily
circuited. So, Zach yesterday already
spoke to some of the scary ideological
underpinnings
of the transhumanist movement in Silicon
Valley, working towards singularity,
towards never dying,
um towards a human enhancement that's
really based on a model of a machine.
But this also, you know, lives in
complete denial of the ecological
catastrophe that we're living through
where the machine is the model for the
future of the human because circuits
actually short when they come into
contact with water.
So we need new myths and new models.
This is the safod.
So, a squid, a cuttlefish, an octopus, a
nautilus. It's an invertebrate and an
ancient.
Among the oldest living creatures on our
planet, their fossil record of 500
million years is twice as old as the
dinosaurs. They continue to thrive in
almost every known ocean habitat.
They are adaptational masters. They are
survivors.
So, I realized somewhere along the way
that I personally do not want to become
a machine. I want to become a safalopod.
So how do we become?
This image represents two very different
ways of becoming capable to exist in a
extreme environment.
So in the dominant western imagination,
one represents progress in the future
and the other the past. But in fact, if
you really think about it, both have
their benefits and their drawbacks,
trade-offs.
In my first free diving training, uh, so
this is diving deep into the sea without
the use of scuba gear. I went from being
able to hold my breath from 20 seconds
to two and a half minutes. This is
within three hours of of training.
It was something I never thought
possible.
But it was made possible with the
physiological and psychological training
techniques that I learned.
I was able to overcome my perceived
limitations that I was actually quite
convinced of of this body that I live in
every day that I breathe with day and
night and here in within 3 hours I was
capable of something I never thought
possible. So really this opened my
thinking to training as a technology and
the question came if I was capable of so
much beyond what I thought possible with
breathing what other capacities reside
within my body just as it is right now.
So this is where this idea came for
training transhumanism. Right? Okay. So,
transhumanism just to say is uh the
definition is kind of the the
intellectual, psychological, physical
also spiritual enhancement of the human.
Right? In today's world, it has come to
be defined with the singularis. But
actually this is an attempt to reclaim
transhumanism and this human enhancement
back.
And the core question around training
transhumanism is how do we actually know
what technologies we need to add on
implant enhance us if we don't even
fully know what's possible with what we
already have with our existing
bioavailabilities
the very body minds you have with you at
this moment available to you.
So,
um, the world record for a single breath
hold underwater is 11 minutes and 35
seconds without the use of any extra
oxygen, any other tools. And as my free
diving instructor, Savannah, whispered
to me the first time I was holding my
breath um, while she held my face down
gently underwater in the pool, "Your
urge to breathe is a lie.
What does this mean? So the our initial
urge to breathe comes not from a lack of
oxygen but from a buildup of carbon
dioxide in in our blood. Right? And so
our body is sending us signals. Oh, the
carbon dioxide is building up. This in
itself at first is not dangerous. And
part of what we train even as my chest
was convulsing because I wanted to
breathe so much is that the convulsions
will go away. It's just a signal. And
with training that signal comes later
and later your urge to breathe is a lie.
So I want to explore that together with
you now.
So there are is this on? Yeah. So there
are um four different breathing
techniques that are really crucial in
free diving. The first is a I want to
practice together. Try just try and join
me. Um, the first is a relaxation
breathing technique. And the goal of
this technique is to slow down your
heart rate because the slower your heart
is beating, the less oxygen you need,
right? So, we can stay under longer. And
it's a pretty simple technique. You're
going to breathe in for four counts and
out for eight. Let's try that together
now just once. So, we're going to go in
2 3 4 and out 2 3 4 5 6 7 8. We'll do
that. Generally, you want to do that
maybe about a minute, but we'll do that
al together four times when we put it
together. But first, let me show you now
the second breathing technique. So, the
second breathing technique, it's a
little bit controversial, but Savannah
taught me like this, and I stick um by
it. It's a hyperventilation breath,
right? And so, the goal of the
hyperventilation is to kind of cheat a
little bit and pack a little bit extra
oxygen into your blood supply so you
have just a little bit more time to stay
underwater. And the this breath it works
the opposite of the relaxation breath.
So we're going to breathe in for four
and out for two. And we're going to do
that three times only. If you do it too
many times, you can lose consciousness.
I ask you if you feel like you're losing
consciousness, just breathe normally. Um
but we'll we'll see you if you fall.
We'll come and help you. Um but we do it
only three times. And the one trick with
it is like we're going to breathe in for
four, out for two. You want to really
get all of your air out in that, too.
We're just going to do it once together
now. So, we're going to go in two,
three, four, and
great. So, now comes the big breath.
And when you take a big breath, you
really want to pack every part of your
body full of air, full of oxygen. When
free divers are training, they're
actually begin to like do stretches to
move their ribs out of the way to really
fit in that air. So when we take this
breath, we breathe first into the belly,
then into the chest, and then we even
want to fill the throat and the mouth
full of air, right? So
So we'll try that together once now. So
breathe into the belly, into the chest,
and into the throat and mouth.
and breathe out.
Great. And the last one is particularly
important when you're in the water, but
it's really important to practice. So,
it's a recovery breath. Again, it's
helping you to keep your consciousness
with you. So, when you're you're holding
your breath, you're holding as long as
you can. You really want to let it all
out, but instead of letting it all out
at once, we we uh temper our desire for
a moment. and we breathe out only half
the air, then breathe back in, then
breathe out threequarters of the air,
breathe back in, and then breathe
everything out. So, we're going to do
that together. So, we're going to take a
big breath. So, one more time to
practice the belly, the chest, the
throat, and mouth. And then breathe out
half,
three/4ers,
and everything out.
Okay, we're going to put that all
together now. And I'm going to grab my
phone so I can time us. Um, I have
lights on me, so I'm going to have to
really watch out to see who's still
holding and who's not. I might have to
ask you to help me. But with that, we're
going to start with relaxation. So, in
for four, out for eight. So, we're going
to go in 2 3 4 and out. 2 3 4 5 6 7 8.
And in,
and out. Two, three, four, five, six,
seven, eight. And in
seven, eight. Last one. In
and out. 2 3 4 five 6 7 8. Now in for
four, out for two. Three times in a row.
In and out. And in.
And out. And in. Two. Three. And out.
And then big breath. Belly, chest,
throat, and mouth.
57 seconds. Not Not my best. Is someone
still holding?
Very good.
127 Very good.
So, thank you
And hopefully you discovered something
there.
So today together we're going to embark
upon an evolution,
a psychopysical training regimen
designed to expand human potential.
Transhumanist sephopod evolution
proposes a new model for the future of
the human, the sephopod.
So right now there might have been
moments of discomfort for you in holding
your breath. As with any training,
things can get a little bit
uncomfortable for certain moments. So
discomfort is okay. There can be no
transformation without discomfort.
But if we move out of discomfort and
into overwhelm, then transformation
ceases to be possible. So what I'm going
to ask you is to be just a little
vigilant in tracking your own nervous
system and really noticing what is
discomfort and what is overwhelm.
negotiating this and taking care of
yourself accordingly.
Um, I'm also going to ask you to notice
your spleen. So, the spleen among other
things uh releases red blood cells when
we're running low on oxygen. And the
Baja people um of the South Pacific kind
of who spend nine months of the year on
the water and have a long many thousand
year tradition of diving.
geneticists discovered that they
actually had an adaptation that is
presumed to be linked to the fact that
um they tend to have a spleen that's
150% the size of the average human
spleen. Right? So just a reminder that
the practices that we practice every day
over the course of generations have the
capacity to actually change our
physiology.
So as part of transhumanist evolution,
we trained three main intelligences of
the safod. So the first is tactile
intelligence. Uh seeing with the skin,
so touch as a form of data gathering and
listening to the availability, learning
to listen to the availability of
everything you touch. and really
thinking about touch externally, like
the data I'm gathering on the on the
surface of my skin, but also the feeling
that I have inside my body and the
information this gives me about who I'm
with, where I'm at, what's going on
around me.
The second is shape-shifting
intelligence. So, octopuses, cuttlefish
have this incredible ability to change
color, change texture, change mimic
other organisms movement patterns. And
of course, as humans, we have limited
abilities to change perhaps color and
texture. But we do have the ability to
develop a hyper awareness of our
hyperlocal environment. And then the
ability to swiftly change our role, our
uh
identity, let's say, or the way we're
presenting for the situation for best
resiliency in set environment.
So this is um the very beginning
development of the of the training
program. This is me and Luciana Augara,
one of the choreo the choreographers
that inspired and and developed this
practice together with me.
The third intelligence is a distributed
intelligence. So octopuses in particular
are pretty incredible in that they break
the cartisian divide. It's literally not
really possible to say where is brain
and where is body because there are
neurons spread throughout the body and
there are actually concentration of
ganglia in each arm and we witness that
sometime the the arms are like one arm
is trying to feed the mouth and the
other arm is pushing the arm away right
so they they may not even be agreeing
and it's unclear of how much they're
even aware of who's thinking what and
yet they're housed within a single body
and so from this comes the the thought
okay yes we can distribute our
intelligence a bit throughout our
bodies, but we do tend to be quite
centralized beings with a bunch of
neurons in the brain and then this
spinal cord running down the center of
the body. But where do we come into
moments of shared cognition with other
humans and other beings and really
thinking about this as beyond
negotiation, beyond collaboration,
paying attention and becoming open to
the mode of shared cognition that can
emerge between us. Perhaps this is
something you've experienced with music
improvisation or like a really good
conversation or a really good um dance
with someone, right? Where suddenly I'm
not making the decision and you're not
making the decision, but there's some
decision- making happening.
So
this is um the film that was made. Your
urge to breathe is a lie. It's really
like the core of the work is the
training. There'll be a training
workshop tomorrow. You all are welcome
to join. but also this film that
documents some of the training that
happened that's uh on view here.
Um some demonstrations, some
installations of the film. Also this
kind of training transhumanism cosmology
map uh showing some of the the thinking
that that comprises the world. Also the
training manual that's given away every
time the film is shown. And I think
there are still some posters left behind
you that just um shows some of the
exercises that we that we practice
um as we train to become a a sephalopod.
And just one last exercise we've been
talking a lot today about like body
bodies. Um but I would like to you know
maybe we remember together that we have
our our bodies that we kind of think
about as individual but very much like
practicing the collective body as well.
So I'm going to ask for a volunteer
actually.
Yeah you can come up on stage. So touch
without contact
is a practice um that emerged together
with one of the people that I um was
developing this practice with. Thank
you. What's your name? Krishna. Okay. So
touch without contact. Basically um we
were doing a lot of touching and at some
point everybody got too used to touching
and this thought came what about like if
we are about to touch but we don't touch
and maybe then our brain kind of shoots
a little extra dopamine and we are
paying even closer attention to what is
happening. So I'm going to invite you.
You can be the touch without context
here if you want to come as close to my
arm as possible
but without coming into actual physical
contact. And then now you can maybe move
up and down.
What does that feel like?
>> I can definitely feel the heat. Um and
it almost feels like a little bit of
like a wave uh moving like a little
water. Not water but like a wave. like
there's like a liquid over the space.
>> So with that, I'm going to invite you to
maybe turn to somebody near you. Maybe
you want to stand or you can stay
sitting. You can do it in groups of two
or three and just try and you can both
try to be the toucher and experience
what it's like to be touched without
contact and what happens to your
awareness, what happens to your
sensation of coming together with the
other body.
But also you can become the toucher. And
what happens when we can maybe even do
both at the same time?
I'm just gonna play One second. I'm just
gonna play
The answer
is
Thank you so much.
>> Thank you.
Okay, so that's just a little taste one
of the exercises that we practice. Uh,
this is the Institute for Transhuman
Evolution, octopus.net with a zero. Um,
or follow us on Instagram. Your urge to
breathe is a lie. Thank you.